All
right. Good afternoon, everyone, and welcome to this tutorial. So this tutorial is about recent developments in geometric the
Deep learning, and I will be holding this together with my colleague Beh, so let me start with what this tutorial is about, and what we're actually going to talk about here.
So, essentially, this tutorial, I said geometric deep learning and geometry is a really, really big field. So, mostly this tutorial will focus on symmetries. So, we have different types of symmetries in machine learning, we have symmetries in data and tasks, and these appear in many different applications. So, when you describe data as point clouds, as graphs, they come up in molecules, in sets, in robotics, and in many other places.
But symmetries also come up actually within our neural networks, within our models themselves. So, we'll also talk about those kinds of symmetries, and they affect many things that we care about, like training of deep methods, interpretability, and so on.
So, why do we care about symmetries? Actually, symmetries affect a lot of things, as I said, that we care about. So, symmetries affect learning and sample complexity, how much data do I need? They affect properties of my task, they affect generalization ability, and also robustness. How does my model generalize out of distribution?
Generative models are affected by symmetries, and then if we look at symmetries within models, they affect optimization, sampling, because we may have, like, they affect the sample, the optimization landscape, the modes we have, and they affect the comparison of models, analysis of models, merging of models, and so on. So there's many different reasons to care about symmetries.
So I said, okay, like, vaguely these are symmetries. Let me actually a bit more formally define what I mean by a symmetry, and show you a few actual examples from machine learning.
So, essentially, symmetry of an object is a transformation of that object that leaves certain properties unchanged. So, to take a specific example, let's say T is my transformation, so I apply my transformation T to my data point X. Let's say I take the image or the cat in the image and I shift the cat around in the image, that's my transformation is the shift. And now the fact that this is a cat is completely independent of where in the image that cat sits. So I want the classification to be independent of the shift.
This also occurs in point clouds, so this person here, you may not be able to see it, is actually described as a point cloud, as many other objects. So, in this case, How do I actually describe my point cloud? Essentially by a set of vectors. So, these vectors is just an array of vectors. Now, in which order these vectors come doesn't have anything to do with what these vectors describe, it's still the same shape, so my model should be invariant to permutations of these vectors. In this case, we may also want to be invariant. If I say I want to classify that shape, invariant to shifts of that person, like shifts of the cloud of vectors or rotations, and so on of that same thing,
here are a few other examples again of permutation. So, when we do learning on graphs, there's a ton of applications where we, where the data is described as a graph.
How do we describe the graph? So, one way to describe the graph is via its adjacency matrix, that's if you have n nodes, it's an n by n matrix, the i j's entry refers to the edge between node i and node j, and now basically, what this matrix looks like depends on the order of my nodes, how in that matrix. So, if I permute the nodes, essentially it corresponds to swapping the columns and rows of these particular indices, and of course it still describes the same graph, it's just a different description of the same object, so I want my neural network to be invariant to that, so basically be blind to these permutations, as long as the same graph.
A similar thing also occurs within neural networks, so this is a picture of an MLP where we have these different layers, and now if I draw my MLP on a board, basically the order in which I draw the units in one layer doesn't matter, so I could swap two of them. It's still exactly the same thing if I like keep the connectivity. So this swapping of the neurons corresponds to changing swapping rows and columns in my weight matrices, and that is like rows in one matrix and columns in the other matrix, those correspond to essentially these edges connected to the unit, and however, if I swap these neurons on my board, it doesn't matter, it's still exactly the same model, that means it still implements exactly the same function, so it's still the same object, so when we deal with that, we want to be mostly blind to these kinds of transformations that preserve exactly the function that this neural network implements.
Now, all of this was about invariance, where basically I had made a transformation to my input and I didn't want the output of my prediction model, for instance, to change.
Now, there's another version of symmetry where I want the output to change according to how I change the input. Let me give you an example. So, here's a graph, and let's say we want to learn node embeddings for this graph. So, we take our neural network, a graph network, a transformer, or something. We input a set of node features, so these are these vectors, and we get a set of node embeddings out, so these may be your tokens, or so.
Now, the order of the input is exactly the order of the output, so these are the corresponding tokens.
Now, the order of the inputs is pretty arbitrary. I could have put my input, my node features in a different order, however, it's still exactly the same graph, so I still want exactly the same node embeddings, because they should only depend on what that graph is. Hence, if I permute the inputs, the order of the inputs, I want the outputs to be permuted in exactly the same way.
So, this means if I permute, if I apply my transformation to the input, I want sort of a corresponding transformation to be applied to the output, so this is what's called equivariance, and this is you get this kind of commutation, commutative diagram here.
So transformation of inputs relates to transformation of the outputs, and this doesn't only occur with permutations, you could also get this, for instance, with rotations or shifts. So, let's say we talk about our point clouds again. Maybe here they describe a protein, like an antibody. If I say want to make, like, do something to say the one part of that protein, a binding pocket, or so. If I rotate the entire thing, whatever I do to it should be rotating accordingly. Likewise, if I look at this robotic arm, if I basically change the, like, I turn it or so, then whatever action it has to do basically has to transform in the same way. So here I want the output to transform according to the input, and in some way, equivariance describes it also. You could view invariance where I don't change the output as a special case of equivariance, where the transformation is always the identity. Typically, in invariance, the prediction is a scalar. In equivariance, the prediction is a vector, or something like that.
So, why do we care about implementing, for instance, or taking these symmetries into account when we do machine learning models, one reason is that we have fewer degrees of freedom, so if we already know that the function we want to learn has these symmetries, then well, we don't have to learn that, we can get it for free, essentially, and that can get great gains in sample complexity, so here's an example of a paper from SI, from using AI in the sciences to do inter atomic potentials, which says, okay, the this invariant equivariant model outperforms existing models with up to three orders of magnitude fewer training data, and this can matter if your training data is actually very expensive to get, this also matter may matter at scale. So, on the right-hand side, you see another picture of a scaling law of training compute for baseline model and an equivariant model. So, both of these are transformers, and it shows at basically at a specific computational cost, you may actually still get gains, even like at scale, if you use an equivariant model, so data efficiency or computational efficiency could be a consideration. Another consideration could be robustness, for instance, to out of distribution, because if I know that if I say transform my data, I rotate my data, it still preserves the same label, I exactly know how my model will extrapolate that it's extrapolating in a predictable way, so this gives me more stability, and I know what will happen.
So, obviously, for these reasons, there has been a lot of interest in this area, and there has been an active area of research. So, there have been already, like, there's this nice book on geometric deep learning, and there have been other tutorials. So, what is this tutorial about? And how is it different? So, what we tried to do here is we to give you a little bit of an overview of different strategies of how to actually implement symmetries in machine learning, and also to give you some pointers on new directions. So, for instance, the new parameter symmetries within neural networks, or new theoretical results, and so on. So it's basically capturing, especially in part two, we'll capture a lot of the newer directions.
So here's the roadmap for today. So in part one, we'll mostly cover basics. So we'll talk about some basics that we have to do. We'll not talk too much about group theory, even though it underlies a lot of these things, but we'll talk about how to maybe use all of this in machine learning to have different options for modeling, and we'll also show you some examples, and then in part two we will talk about some other recent directions, for instance, making this more flexible.
What are parameter symmetries within your networks, and what do they mean, and then also some new theoretical results, and then in the end we'll do a little bit of a discussion, and then we'll have a Q and A. So the way we will do this is we will have part one about an hour, then we'll have a 15 minute break, so two hours in a row is a bit long, and then we all come back, and then we'll do part two, and then we'll do a Q and A. Also, okay, so let's start with a bit more basics.
So we talked about invariance and equivariance to transformations, where we want the input to the output to not change, or to change basically in a predictable way. If we change the input, these transformations that we are talking about, like rotations or permutations, or so they form a group, and a lot of what we talk about builds on the theory of groups.
So, let me define what is a group. So, a group is a collection of transformations, and it has some binary operation, which is essentially the concatenation of these group operations, it is so this operation is associative.
And then there is three important properties. The first one is this group should have an identity element. So, what's the identity? It's basically what you think it is. If you think about rotations, it's basically rotation by degree zero, or if you think about permutation, it's basically the permutation that leaves everything in its place or not translating at all.
Then each group element has an inverse, so if I rotate, say by 90 degree, I can also rotate backwards by 90 degree, and that backwards rotation has to also be a member of my group, so it has to be complete in that sense, or if I permute, I swap two elements, I have to be able to swap them back.
And now the last one is closure, and basically that means if I concatenate two group elements, that concatenation should also still be in my group. That means if I rotate by 90 degrees, then the 180 degree rotation has to also be a member of my group, or like basically, if I combine any of these two elements, so if I have all of these properties, then I have a group. So, even though this looks fairly simple, actually, there's a lot of rich theory and math you can derive from all of that.
We'll not talk about a lot of this math here.
I just want to have one more slide on some common concepts that occur, so that you basically have seen the terminology.
The first one is the so-called group action, so because we say that our group members are transformations, these transformations transform something, so the group element acts on something, so the group acts on a space, and so this is the group action denoted by this dot here.
So, for instance, the permutation acts on a set of indices by well swapping them, essentially, or the set of invertible matrices is also a group, and so any matrix in this group acts on a vector by well, matrix multiplication, so this is just a times x.
Often these actions can be represented as linear matrix multiplication. So my group element can actually be represented as a matrix, at least in these cases that we are talking about here. So a permutation, for instance, can be represented as a permutation matrix. A rotation of vectors can be represented by a rotation matrix, and so on.
And then what we need is that basically this is compatible with the concatenations.
And finally, one concept that's going to be useful is that of an orbit, so say I have a data point x and I apply all possible transformations from my group to that data point, that's called the orbit. So it's just a collection of all possible transformations that I can do with my group.
Okay, so the group acts, and this group action can often be represented by a matrix multiplication here, and then the collection of all transformations of a data point is the orbit.
Okay, so this was pretty much all the basics that we need for now. So now let's look at how could we actually get models that respect the symmetries in the data, that means these models somehow learn a function that is invariant or equivariant, and so we structured these methods into two different families. Let's say the first one says, "Okay, I have a black box off the shelf method, I have my favorite neural network, I want to use it, I want to reuse it, because it works really well, and I just want to do something that this, like this model that I get, is symmetric, and the second set of methods is actually thinking about constructing new models from scratches, more or less from scratch, that are equivariant, and then we'll discuss a little bit the pros and cons of these, so the first method of using like the black box model is data augmentation, which probably everyone in this room knows, so it's the simple idea that well, I have my neural network and it's any neural network, and I take my data point and I apply different data augmentations essentially to it, so I rotate it in different ways, and now I feed all these variations of my data point into my model as well, and I preserve the label, so this way the model learns that it should basically be invariant to rotations, it shouldn't take care of rotations.
This is very simple, and it's applicable pretty much, okay, not everywhere. You have to know the transformations, but if you know them, it's pretty simple.
The drawback of this is that it's basically an approximate symmetry, so the model kind of learns this, but you're not guaranteed that it's always going to be invariant, so if you transform your data, it's not guaranteed that it's like to some place it hasn't been, hasn't seen before, it's not guaranteed that it's actually going to extrapolate in this equivariant or invariant way, so data augmentation can be used, of course, with supervised learning. It can also be used with self-supervised learning. For instance, I can ease it's easily compatible with contrastive learning, and essentially there I give the model pairs of data and say these are the same, essentially. So, what it learns is that all transformations of my data point should be mapping to a single representation in my latent space, so all the orbits of a data point essentially map to one place in my latent space, and then, of course, if I do classification after that, everyone in that orbit, like all the transformation of my data point, are going to get the same class.
Now this is pretty obvious. If I want invariance, however, in self-supervised learning and representation learning, it's also known that, like, maybe sometimes I want to remember a little bit more about the actual transformation that I did to my data point. I don't want to fully forget about, say, all the rotation, all the transformations I did, so I want to sort of retain that information, and I want to be able maybe to read it out from my latent space.
So, what this means is, if I do an augmentation to my data point, I want the embedding to transform in a predictable way by some transformation, TA.
So, now if we look at it this way, this looks a lot like equivariance. So, for an augmentation I want a predictable transformation.
How could we do this? How could we learn a representation that does that explicitly? So one idea is the following. I say, well, okay, this transformation I encode it with another learnable method, maybe a small MLP that takes as input the augmentation and my anchor point, essentially, and then predicts where you go.
So, if you look at this, this looks essentially this joint embed. You do a joint embedding model, you encode like the data point and its transformation, and then you say that basically the transformed data point should be predictable by applying the MLP to the initial embedding, so that's the loss, and this actually works, and you see this is exactly this commutative diagram that we had for equivariance before.
Now the only shortcoming of this is that, okay, I actually have this nonlinear transformation, TA, it's not super interpretable, and the other thing is that if I train it this way, I may or may not get that my transformation TA is compatible with compositions, so that if I do two augmentations, that it's actually going to be TA and then TB or something.
It turns out you can actually get this, and it turns out you can do this thing actually even with a linear transformation TA, which is a little bit simpler, and you don't have to directly learn this TA. For that, we can use some of the well thoughts about symmetries again.
So, let me show how this works. Show you how this works. So, now we say that our TA is actually just a linear transformation. In this case, it will be a rotation, because our data lives on a sphere because it's normalized, so the idea is basically that now we know that our transformation is going to be a rotation, or we want it to be a rotation, and we think about what properties are preserved by rotations, and one property that is preserved by rotations is angle. If I have two vectors, I rotate them, the angle between them remains the same. So that's the important bit. So, how are we going to use that? So we're going to use this as follows. We have now another data point. So we have these two data points, and now if we augment both of them, we rotate both of them in input space, and that means we want their like representations to be transformed in the same way in represent representation space—that means if their augment
The
augmentation are transformed the same way the angles between their representations should stay the same, so the angle, like the blue angle and the red angle, essentially between the representations and the representations of the augmentations of the augmented data points should be stay the same, and this essentially you can encode this as a loss, and now, using some math, what you can show is that this is actually enough. If you just use this loss and the preservation of angles, that's enough. If the loss is small, that each augmentation is represented by a rotation in your latent space, so it's just a linear rotation. So, this is obviously then compatible with the concatenations, and the cool thing is that this, of course, you can imagine this works if I rotate my input. The latent representations are rotated, but you can actually also do this for some other groups using some group theory. So this input represents input augmentation doesn't necessarily have to be a rotation.
Okay, so this was all I wanted to say about data augmentation to give you a little bit, a few ideas here.
Next, I want to talk a little bit more about some other methods that actually, so while data augmentation doesn't guarantee that your model is going to be invariant. The other ones are going to guarantee that whatever you get is actually invariant, and so the other models also use the neural network as a black box, so you can use any model essentially, and they act by transforming the data, so one is canonicalization, so it basically says that your data is going to be pre-processed, that every data point sits in a canonical representation, maybe all your objects are going to be upright or all your sequences are going to be sorted, and then you feed it into your network. On the other end, we have group averaging, and that says I don't apply a single transformation to my data point, I apply all possible transformations to my data point, and then I feed all of them into my model. If these are 100 then I get 100 outputs, and then I average that.
So, these are the two extremes, essentially. So, let's look at them a little bit. So, the first one was canonicalization. So, very simple idea, I have say input sequences, I sort them, and then I feed them into my network. Now, of course, every permuted sequence is going to end up with the same sorted sequence, and hence the neural network is always going to predict the same thing. So, this is obviously permutation invariant.
If I want something that is equivariant, so basically the output is permuted in the same way as the input.
I do the following, so in this case the output has to be a sequence because they can't permute a scalar. And then basically all I do is I invert that sorting, so basically any transformation I do on the left I'm going to undo it on the right, depending on like what the sorting was, and that way I get an equivariant thing. It's basically sorted the same way as the input was sorted, and this is the general principle. I apply my transformation, I feed it in my neural network, and then I undo the transformation, essentially, and that way I get equivariance. So this is simple. It's pretty simple, and it basically inherits a lot of the properties of that base model. If your base model is very strong, this can just inherit all the properties, and the other thing is the canonicalization can also be learned. You don't have to handcraft it necessarily.
Now, with any method, this one also has some challenges with it. And so, what are the challenges with this simple method?
So, one thing is that for some data points, like sequences, this is pretty easy. How to canonicalize them, but if I give you a graph, for instance, this is not at all obvious. What would be sort of a canonical representation of that graph? And in fact, if you could do this, you would solve the graph isomorphism problem, which is a very challenging problem.
The other issue is potentially that there are symmetries in the input, so if you look at this, oh, or you have like multiple numbers that are the same in your sequence, it's not like it's not a unique transformation that you're applying, actually, to get this, so in some cases it doesn't matter, like the sorting, but in some cases, like when you have the rotations, it may actually lead to discontinuities, because you like rotate it a bit in the input, and like you'll apply a different transformation, and indeed the continuity is a challenge with this method. So, let me show you, illustrate this to you in a little bit more detail.
So, what does continuity mean? It means if I have two inputs that are close, the outputs should also be close together. That's what continuity means. So, here I have two sequences that are close to each other, just a small perturbation in one number. If I sort them and I canonicalize them, the outputs, the sorted versions, are still good. So I'm still good, actually, on this end. So the neural network will get two inputs that are very close, and if the neural network is continuous, which they typically are, you're fine.
Now let me show you a different example. Now, instead of numbers, we are sorting vectors, so I have a point cloud, I have my few vectors, and I sort them first by the first entry and then by the second entry.
So I do the same thing again. I have a small perturbation in one of the elements, and here's the sorted output, and now if you look closely, because of that 3.01 being combined with seven, the outputs by Euclidean distance are actually pretty far from each other, so this can be a problem, because now if I input these two sorted sequences into my neural network, I'm not guaranteed that the predictions are going to be close for these two sets of vectors, and so this is an issue that this is a continuity issue. Now, the thing is, maybe this was just that I did like the sorting is maybe not the right way to canonicalize this. However, there's a recent result that says that if you have permutations of in more than one dimension, this, this is always an issue, so there's always going to be going to be some discontinuity in your canonicalization. Same if you do rotations and reflections in two dimensions, it's going to be the same problem. So in some cases it's just impossible to get a canonical continuous canon
Also has some challenges with it, and so what are the challenges with this simple method.
So one thing is that for some data points, like sequences, this is pretty easy, how to canonicalize them, but if I give you a graph, for instance, this is not at all obvious. What would be sort of a canonical representation of that graph? And in fact, if you could do this, you would solve the graph isomorphism problem, which is a very challenging problem.
The other issue is potentially that there are symmetries in the input, so if you look at this O, or you have like multiple numbers that are the same in your sequence, it's not like it's not a unique transformation that you're applying, actually, to get this, so in some cases it doesn't matter, like the sorting, but in some cases, like when you have the rotations, it may actually lead to discontinuities, because you like rotate it a bit in the input, and like you'll apply a different transformation, and indeed the continuity is a challenge with this method. So let me show you, illustrate this to you in a little bit more detail. So, what does continuity mean? It means if I have two inputs that are close, the outputs should also be close together. That's what continuity means. So, here I have two sequences that are close to each other, just a small perturbation in one number. If I sort them and I canonicalize them, the outputs, the sorted versions are still good, so I'm still good, actually, on this end. So the neural network will get two inputs that are very close, and if the neural network is continuous, which they typically are, you're fine.
Now let me show you a different example. Now, instead of numbers, we are sorting vectors, so I have a point cloud, I have my few vectors, and I sort them first by the first entry, and then by the second entry, so I do the same thing again. I have a small perturbation in one of the elements, and here's the sorted output, and now if you look closely, because of that 3.01 being combined with seven, the outputs by Euclidean distance are actually pretty far from each other, so this can be a problem, because now if I input these two sorted sequences into my neural network, I'm not guaranteed that the predictions are going to be close for these two sets of vectors, and so this is an issue that this is a continuity issue. Now the thing is, maybe this was just that I did like the sorting is maybe not the right way to canonicalize this, however, there's a recent result that says that if you have permutations of in more than one dimension, this can, this is always an issue, so there's always going to be some discontinuity in your canonicalization. Same if you do rotations and reflections in two dimensions, it's going to be the same problem. So, in some cases, it's just impossible to get a canonical continuous canonicalization here.
Okay, however, if we do this group averaging, that's my second option, that's always guaranteed to be continuous, because we use all possible transformations, so that issue doesn't arise. So, let's look at group averaging as an alternative here. So, group averaging does a similar thing. I do a transformation to my data point, I apply my function, I undo that transformation if I want equivariance, and now I just do this for all possible transformations in my group.
Now this is powerful, and that's it's continuous, and it's you can prove that if your neural network, your base model F, is powerful in approximation in an approximation sense. Then this can approximate all invariant or equivariant functions.
So, what are the drawbacks? So, the pros are it's super simple. I don't even have to think about the canonicalization, or so it's expressive, it's continuous. However, the drawbacks are also fairly obvious, if your group is not for transformations, but if your group is all possible permutations or all possible rotations, this is going to be pretty challenging to do so. In that case, you'll have to do approximations, or so, or do a subset of the group's elements, or something like that.
So, some examples where this group averaging was actually used is the Genossy pooling paper for permutations, and one application of essentially this idea was to get more powerful graph representation learning methods by labeling the nodes in the graph, and then doing this group averaging to get permutation of the node embeddings, again permutation invariance or equivariance.
A second example is neural networks on eigenvectors. So, this is a bit less familiar, maybe. Why do you want eigenvectors to be input for a neural network? So, one place you need this is for neural fields on manifolds. Another place you need it is if you want to do sometimes positional encodings for graphs, so you want to use a transformer for a graph, or even a message passing network. We want a positional encoding. It typically comes from the eigenvectors of the Laplacian, or that's one way to do it. Now, what's the problem with eigenvectors? Well, if v is an eigenvector, then minus v is also an eigenvector, and if I use a solver, whether I get V or minus V, it's not. I don't know this a priori, so I want my neural network that processes this eigenvector to be blind, basically to the sign flip. This is a very small group, it's basically just the sign flip, two elements.
And now you can do group. This is easy to do, group averaging over to get an even function, and this is something that has been used, for instance, in the Sinet paper to get this sign flip invariant positional encodings for graphs, and it also works on the neural manifolds.
Okay, so like taking a step back, we talked about canonicalization, and we talked about group averaging, one was one transformation, the other one was like a whole bunch of transformations. Is there anything in between?
And indeed there is something in between, and that's frame averaging. So the idea is between one transformation and all possible. I could maybe do a subset of transformations, and so the idea is I look at my data point and based on the data point I select a subset of transformations and do the same thing of averaging over them.
Now it's not a completely arbitrary set. If I trans like to a transformation of my data point, this group, these group elements have to transform in a corresponding way. Let's say I rotate it, because the rotations have to be compatible with that.
Okay, so this is frame averaging. Let me show you one example of what this frame averaging may look like with an actual application. So, let's say we have a point cloud, maybe it describes a protein or something, and we want this to be equivariant to rotations and translations. For instance, reflection is the thing, if you want to be sensitive to chirality, you don't want the reflection, but you can do it without reflections as well.
So, what would this look like? So, in this case, we have rotations and translations, so the transformations I'm going to do are translation rotations and translations. So, I rotate and I shift and I apply my function and I wrote and I shift back,
so what are the rotations and shifts here? So the shift is pretty easy. I just center my data, essentially my point cloud.
What are the rotations? They come from PCA. So I take the eigenvectors that I get in PCA, and now I take all possible sign flips that I can get for these different eigenvectors. So these alphas are plus and minus ones, and this is the collection of the transformations I'm going to do, so that's where they come from, so this is that's why this is called a PCA frame, and it has been applied, for instance, yeah, to represent proteins,
so now I had talked about continuities, do frames solve the continuity issue that we have with canonicalization, and the answer is, unfortunately, in general, no. So, basically, the question is, do my, does my frame need to be the full group or very, very large to get continuity? And in some cases, yes, it actually has to be.
However, there's a remedy, so you could introduce weights in your frame, so instead of a sum, you do a weighted sum, and in that case, in some cases, you can actually do much better, and you can get away to get continuity with a smaller frame.
So, in summary, these symmetrization methods, they have some advantages still. So, they basically inherit all the expressiveness and all the whatever you know how to optimize your base model, and all of these things you can basically inherit all of that, and it's also easy to combine symmetries. If your base model has some symmetries, you do the averaging and addition, you get additional symmetries as well. So it's pretty easy.
However, you do get the drawbacks of the continuity, and potentially like that, you have to use a large group to average over.
Now let me talk also a little bit about the other family of methods, where we construct a neural network, sort of from scratch, and so examples are, for instance, like graph networks, method CNNs, and so on.
So the general generic construction is that I take a bunch of equivariant layers, and then I, if I want invariants, I take one invariant pooling layer in the end, so I can sort of get both of them, depending on whether I use the green layer or not. There's various ways I could get these equivariant layers, and we'll go through a few of them. We'll start with the simplest one, which is basically a linear operation and a point-wise nonlinearity, and this covers a lot of well-known architectures. So, how could I have come up with that?
Let's look at how we actually could derive such a thing. So, let's say we, so basically, what this layer looks like. It looks like an MLP layer, just like an affine transformation. And now, where does the symmetry come in? The symmetry comes in in the structure of my weight matrix, essentially via weight sharing, so that encodes the symmetries.
Why is that so?
Basically, if you look at the definition of equivariance again, it means either I apply I apply my matrix first or I apply my group transformation first, so I can swap them, so basically I get that w times p, my group transformation should be the same as p times w, and you get a similar thing for the bias term. I'm not talking about it here to keep it simple, so let's look at what this looks like when your group is a contains permutations, so it's permutation, all permutations, or a subset of permutations, and what this actually looks like is the following: what your P's do is they're permutation matrices, they are just permuting rows and columns of your matrix W, and that means basically if I look at a specific entry, if there's a way I can apply my permutations to basically get from entry ij to entry kl with permutations, then w ij has to be the same as wkl to have that equality hold, and that way, so they have to have the same entry, so I don't have freedom there.
So let's look at this at an actual example. Let's say I do shiftings as a group operation, and so basically it means so I have like a one dimensional array, I can shift the signal and then wrap around, so then I have my two indices, I basically would increase each index, both of them every time, and this way I get exactly this pattern that you see here, basically I get the cyclic shape now. If I start at a different index, I get the orbit for that one, and so on. And you see the matrix that you get out is this pattern, and I have one parameter for each color. All the basically the squares with the same color, they have to have the same entry. And this is a convolution matrix, so I have derived convolution basically via this method.
Another example is when I look at point clouds, and I basically look at permutation invariance. So I want the full permutation invariance to all vectors or equivariance. What I get is that, well, I can permute all rows and columns of this matrix.
That's a lot, so all I know is all any diagonal element will still be a diagonal element if you do this, so all the diagonals will be the same, and all the other entries I can basically permute them into each other, so I get only two parameters, one for the identity matrix and one for this blue part, and what this blue part means is that it's basically the operation that I take all my vectors and I average them, or I sum them, basically. So I have two weights, one for the identity and one for this averaging operation, and this is pretty much all the equivariant linear operations I can do, and I can maybe add like shared weight to all of the vectors as well,
so this is how I could have derived, for instance, the deep set architecture. It does exactly that. It does averaging and applies transformations to each point separately.
So, in general, what do I get from this? I basically get that I have only one parameter for each color, so it's a much smaller set of like parameters that I get for this model, and each color I could look at, basically as a basis element for this. This can be also generalized to tensors and various other cases. So, the good thing about this is that it's a very general strategy.
It's like you see, it looks fairly simple, however, it's not simple in every case, or sometimes it just doesn't lead to a super expressive model, so sometimes this can be too restrictive in that these linear layers don't give you enough expressivity, but in some cases, like message passing graph neural networks or CNNs, this is a fairly quite a useful model that comes out of this.
So now the other way to get linear layers is via group convolution, and here we'll switch, and Beat Rus will take over with that.
Good afternoon, everyone. So let's continue to talk about methods of obtaining equivariance via
linear layers, so the idea of group convolution comes from the regular convolution, where you have the definition of the backward pass or convolution over d, which is basically the sum over translations of filter times the function, and now if you want to extend it to a group convolution and define it on group, this is just for free. This is just easy, because you know instead of translations, you replace it with another with another group, your group, everything that you like, and then you could basically make that work, because the definition of convolution naturally extends to cases that we have group operation, and this is the main idea, the core idea of group equivariant convolutional neural nets.
So let's talk about the second series of equivariant models, which are basically coming from invariant theory, that is some theory developed in mathematics in early 90s, so the idea is the first idea is to use invariant polynomials, and the main thing is, okay, we could study equivariant functions in generality, but if we study equivariant polynomials, which means the function f is specified to polynomials, you could get some, you know, particularly in nice groups, you could get a finite set of, you know, polynomials, and in many cases, if you collect some low degree polynomial, this is enough for you to use and feed it to some neural networks, and explain the design and equivariant neural net, which is universal. So, basically, low degree polynomials applied on neural networks are enough, and this is the lesson that invariant theory tells us. Let me talk about it by example, via an example, so consider the case that we have, like, n points, a point plot, and we want to be invariant to change of coordinates, so basically rotations are reflections, and if you look at this, like the angle between vectors after rotating them, or like reflect reflections are not changed. In other words, the inner products between, you know, pairs of vectors are not changed. The pace, the angle between pairs of points are not changed. And the first fundamental theory of theorem of OD, which is coming from invariant theory, tells us that this is enough. So, if you just process these inner product. If you have this inner products, process it with neural networks. You're done. You are fully expressive. You can just, you know, correct. You can just express anything.
And for equivariance, this is just easy. Just, you know, apply this on each coordinates and just consider sum of all like linear combination of all points, and you can extend it easily to other cases, for like purely rotations, or like Lorentz group for physics and permutations. So this is a, you know, rich theory that we could use for for constructing neural networks, for instance, if I want to talk about another kind of approach, you could think of translation invariance as just, you know, shifting all the points together, which means you could basically pick a reference point here, I chose like v and then you just compute the distances, relative distances with respect to that point, and invariant theory tells us that this is enough.
So, another way, another kind of application for equivariant models is equivariant neural networks, where you basically have, like, the graph neural network, where each node has some sort of, some kind of feature that is maybe coming from its location or whatever, and it indeed it is translation or rotation invariant. You can think of a molecule or something that is not changed after rotating or translating, and the equivalent graph neural networks are designed using having some sort of invariance here, so basically we use the natural, the, you know, canonical graph neural networks, and here we just add the distances, and also the, you know, the norm of distances between between the different features, and also the purity sensors, and this is going to be enough for us to make equivariant graph neural networks, so all those, like, you know, features, polynomials are enough for us to build equivariant neural networks in this regime.
You could have another application in protein generative models, that here is one example in Chroma that you use the fusion model, and after that, for just like side and other stuff, you use this equivariant GNNs, and it is sucks. It has been successful in practice.
Lastly, I talk about some more sophisticated theory that is coming from representation theory, and I show how you can use this to build covariant models.
Okay, we already talked about a covariant multilayer perceptron, or equivariant linear models, but the main problem is if you impose equivariance on linear layers, then by Schurz lemma from like representation theory, you are in trouble because linear covariant maps are super restricted. You have that, you know, functional equation over the group, so there is a lot of limitations. For instance, if you have like rotations, in some cases you get nothing other than like identity map, which is not good for us, so this is a big limitation, and representation theory tells us that if you go beyond processing your pure data to tensors of your data, then you could achieve rich structure that allows you to basically achieve universality using these linear networks, so you basically have to consider higher order tensor powers of your input, your data, and well, this is this is nice, but the bad news is that, like, sometimes you need to take, like, k, the number of, like, tensor powers super large, which is, which makes it impractical, and sometimes it is tied to some sort of problem in representation theory that is called Clebsch Gordon problem, which makes it difficult in applications, but in simple cases you could apply this and build tensor models.
So now let's talk about a bit of applications here a One nice application of equivariant models in physics is coming from atomic systems. So, you basically, basically have some atom systems, some molecule, and you model it with a graph. So, you have a graph of models. If Adam has, I don't know, some position, some sort of characteristics, and there is a lot of translation, rotation, and permutation symmetry in these molecules. You could see that they are not random, they are just having a lot of structure. And the goal of atomic systems is to predict properties like energy or forces of a molecule, an atomic system, from the graph of it, and given like properties, design new molecules. This is the kind of thing that is, you know,
usually this is solved by scientific complete computing, but geometric machine learning and equivalent neural network can accelerate this. We already talked about an equip that uses, like, Euclidean message passing graph neural networks, and it allows you to achieve to predict potentials for new molecules, and more importantly, if you want to achieve like forces from physics, if you remember, you just take derivative, which here is just autograd, so it's just for free, you get just, you know, forces for free if you, if you can successfully predict energy.
There is also equivariant transformers that is also applied to this particular application. So I would say atomic systems is a very particular, is a particular and very interesting application for physics.
Next, robotics, there is a lot of symmetries in robotics, you can think of this as like on
on the left hand side, you have just some brick something that you need to pick, pick up, and the thing is, in order to pick
up, the robot hasn't has to do some actions, but the main important point here is that if you rotate the brick, then everything that you're going to do is just going to be rotated, you're just doing the same thing, right? You just, the robot has to just rotate and do the same thing. In other words, equivariances are pretty natural, and they appear a lot in robotics.
In other words, there is also a theorem that tells you that the optimal policy for Markov decision processes, which means the optimal way to handle the actions that robots take, is basically equivariant, which makes sense from the previous slide. There is so two se three rotational translational symmetries that they all appear in robotics, and there is a rich equivalent structure architecture design theory in robotics that we're not going to cover the specific applications, but we just mentioned that beyond physics, robotics also has a lot of applications.
Lastly, last part, I want to briefly talk about
the one drawback and one negative side of having a covariant architecture. So far, everything is nice with equivariance, but here there is a serious problem, so there is a proof of something that basically output of an equivalent architecture is always more symmetric with respect to the input, so if you train some generative model or some equivariant on some equivalent architecture with symmetric data, it always produces symmetric things, and that means, for instance, if you consider these two squares, which are like symmetric, I just with just red arrow, they are like more symmetric considered to the two other cases. If you train it on just these two arrow red arrow data, you cannot generate the other things because they are less symmetric, they are not symmetric with respect to all constant multiples of pi half, and that is a problem. They call it like symmetry breaking, which means now how to go beyond symmetries in data while using equivalent architectures, and the way there is a lot of application, there is a lot of methods to do that.
One natural way is to perturb the weights of an equivalent neural network, so that it's no longer equivalent, but maybe it can cover these other cases, can generate more diverse data sets. Other ways are also based on like taking gradients of neural networks and updating data sets, and so on.
So I would say symmetry breaking is one particular case that you need to make sure, like you need to take care when you use equivariant architectures.
And I think that that was it for the first part of the tutorial. So we are going to have like 15 minutes, right, 15 minutes break, and then we will continue after that.
In the first part, we talked a lot about like basics and different ways to get equivariant models, and what we'll do in the second part is talk about well, some other recent directions and applications, and also some more theory that has recently emerged. So this is sort of now we are like looking at and thinking about these models in different contexts.
So here's our roadmap again. We'll start with a few recent directions.
Basically, there's two things I want to highlight: one is like the flexibility of these representations, and the other one is well, neural like symmetries within neural models.
And then we look at theory, also like some analysis and some insights.
Okay, so talking about the first one, so we saw that there's a lot of models like how I could like the lot of ways like how I could get maybe equivariance or invariance into my machine learning model, but there's also, well, there's also certain other considerations. So, mostly when I do this, I assume I have a certain task, I know what are the symmetries in this task, and I target my model, essentially, especially like for this particular task and this particular data set, and like this part, these particular symmetries.
However, in some cases, this can be restricted, so if you think about maybe building foundation models, or so, there the aim is very different. The aim is to build a large model that basically uses, like, basically is applicable to a lot of different tasks and several different data sets, so in some sense, like it's sort of two ends, like I have this like specialized model, and I have a big foundation model that can do a lot of different things. So, the question is, can we somehow like make these geometric models a bit more flexible? So, this is one thing that like people have started thinking about. So, maybe there's a way of going more towards like a more foundation model perspective, and saying that I have one model that jointly encodes multiple symmetries, maybe multiple groups, and then it looks at the data, and it basically can adapt to the data on the fly, or like specialize, like be fine-tuned in a very simple way.
So this is the big picture. There's not a lot of work on this yet, but I just want to show you two examples what this could potentially look like.
So, the first one is the work on contextual world models. So, the idea here is that I have a model, and it is trained on being equivariant to a number of different well groups or transformations, essentially. And then at test time the model is inferring the symmetries that it actually needs by looking at the context, so basically it's getting the symmetries from the context, it can be invariant or equivariant to allow like different combinations of symmetries, and now at test time I'm giving it context, and that specifies basically what symmetries it should be invariant to, and which ones it should be equivariant to. So, for instance, here, like, I give it pairs of images, and then I also give it, like, some parameters of, say, that flipping or color, whatever change I did to my data, and that basically tells the model what it should be sensitive. to. A different a different model is the following—and so this appeared like in a work or will appear in a workshop, like at this conference later in the week. And so this is called any subgroup
Well, neural like symmetries within neural models, and then we look at theory, also like some analysis and some insights.
Okay, so talking about the first one, so we saw that there's a lot of models, like how I could, like a lot of ways, how I could get maybe equivariance or invariance into my machine learning model, but there's also, well, there's also certain other considerations. So, mostly when I do this, I assume I have a certain task, I know what are the symmetries in this task, and I target my model, essentially, especially like for this particular task and this particular data set, and like this part, these particular symmetries.
However, in some cases, this can be restricted. So, if you think about maybe building foundation models, or so, there the aim is very different. The aim is to build a large model that basically uses, like, basically is applicable to a lot of different tasks and several different data sets, so in some sense, like it's sort of two ends, like I have this like specialized model, and I have a big foundation model that can do a lot of different things. So the question is, can we somehow like make these geometric models a bit more flexible? So this is one thing that like people have started thinking about, so maybe there's a way of going more towards like a more foundation model perspective, and saying that I have one model that jointly encodes multiple symmetries, maybe multiple groups, and then it looks at the data, and it basically can adapt to the data on the fly, or like specialize, like be fine-tuned in a very simple way, so this is the big picture. There's not a lot of work on this yet, but I just want to show you two examples. What this could potentially look like, so the first one is the work on contextual world models. So the idea here is that I have a model and it is trained on being equivariant to a number of different well groups or transformations, essentially, and then at test time the model is inferring the symmetries that it actually needs by looking at the context, so basically it's getting the symmetries from the context, it can be invariant or equivariant to allow like different combinations of symmetries, and now at test time I'm giving it context, and that specifies basically what symmetries it should be invariant to and which ones it should be equivariant to. So, for instance, here, like I gave it pairs of images, and then I also give it like some parameters of say that flipping or whatever change I did to my data, and that basically tells the model what it should be sensitive to.
A different, a different model is the following, and so this appeared like in a work, or will appear in a workshop, like at this conference later in the week, and so this is called any subgroup equivariant networks.
So there, the idea is I have a larger group, so I have a model that's like equivariant to a larger group, and then I have a special input that can sort of switch and steer what part of the group you actually want to be equivariant to, and the rest you forget about. So, at a high level, how this works is that I have some function h, which is equivariant to the entire group, and it has two arguments, x and v, and v is sort of the steering argument, and now my actual function later is just going to be f of x, so the v is hidden, but the v is my latent, like my extra input that can steer the symmetries, and now what I do is I basically I select the V in a way that basically the symmetries in V. So if I apply a transformation in V and it leaves it unchanged, these are the symmetry transformations that my model will be equivariant to, and the others not. So this works with symmetry breaking, so this is at a very high level. It uses some ideas that you can represent basically these groups in terms of graphs, and then uses hypergraphs and graphs, and to actually implement this. But this is the high level to basically have that steering element, and that way you can basically have the same model, and you just input like the selection, basically of the symmetries that you want.
So just at a high level, basically, the idea is that via like the models we talked about in part one, they are very targeted to a specific symmetry, a specific task, like now it's also like the perspective is emerging that maybe we want to take a broader look and have a model that jointly encodes multiple symmetries, and then you can adapt it on the fly, the other way to make the models more flexible is to say, well, maybe I don't even know a priori also what symmetries I want, maybe I can learn them from the data, so just as just the idea of symmetry discovery. So, so far we said we know the symmetries ahead of time, maybe I want to discover them, maybe I actually want to learn about the data. I am actually interested what symmetries it actually has. So, I want to learn them or discover them. How could I do this? And there's various ways I could do this, and they are sort of a little bit similar to the techniques we talked about in the first part of the talk. So, one part of techniques was transforming the data in some way, one part of techniques was changing the architecture in some way, so essentially the techniques reflect that. So one like set of works says, well, I'm trying to learn a data transformation that, for instance, leaves my this data distribution unchanged. So if the distribution is symmetric, I basically learn what augmentations would keep this distribution, or that helps basically perform better in supervised learning. So they learn the data transformation. The otherwise is to parameterize the architecture in some way. So we, for instance, we talked about the linear equivariant layers, and you have these parameter sharing structures and patterns. So you could parameterize this, and because these directly correspond to the symmetries, and then basically learn those, or in a convolution you could learn to select basically certain group members for this convolution.
Another approach is instead of like actually learning a flexible model, is to just take any model and train it like an off-the-shelf model and train it, and then later try to probe what symmetries did this model actually learn, so it's sort of a post hoc analysis in what actually the model inferred from
the data. Okay, so a little bit on the perspective of there's various lines of works that we can't cover in detail that like make the symmetry more flexible and more adaptive and more general.
The next topic I want to talk about is not symmetry in data, but symmetries in models. So, what could this look like? Say we have our neural network, and now there's cases that I can make a transformation to the weights in my network, and it's still exactly the same model. It's still, I mean, it's looks like it has different parameters, but it's still exactly the same function that it implements.
So, what could this look like? Let me show you some actual examples. So, my first example is in MLPs, and these are some well-known symmetries. For instance, if you have a ReLU activation function, well, what you can do is you can scale up one layer and scale down another layer, and that scaling is essentially going to cancel out because of the homogeneity of that activation function.
So now, instead of w1 and w2 you have basically alpha times or one over alpha times w1 and alpha times w2 It looks like two different sets of weights, but it's exactly the same function it's implementing similar cases with permutations. So, if you think of your MLP, if you draw it out on a board, the order in which you put the neurons in a layer is pretty arbitrary. So, what you could do is you could swap just these nodes, basically in that computation graph, and it's still exactly the same model, like you take the edges with it, so it's really exactly the same thing, it just looks different, but it's a different drawing of the same thing. So, what does this correspond to? It basically corresponds to swapping rows and columns of your adjacent weight matrices. If I swap these nodes, I'm swapping columns, oh, sorry, in one layer and the rows in the other layer, that's what it corresponds to, and obviously it's not changing anything about the computation that this model does, it's just changing the way I write down these matrices, so w2 times P transpose and P times w1 is exactly the same model as w1 and w2
so now these symmetries don't only appear in MLPs, they appear in almost all of the like components that we have in our neural networks. So one other example is wherever we have matrix products, where do they appear? Well, in attention, for instance, you have matrix products. The other one is in Loras, so Loras is for fine tuning large models. You don't actually update the weight matrix, you actually learn an update that's just a low rank factorization, the UV transpose.
Now, if I look at this UV transpose, essentially I could stick any invertible matrix R in there, so this RR inverse cancels out, but you are and VR inverse transpose. These are two different sets of parameters. They look, they may look very different, whatever R looks like, but it's exactly the same update that I have. It's exactly the same model. So this invariance is called GLR, for the general linear group. So all invertible matrices, and now if you look, for instance, at a full transformer, it has a whole set of symmetries, and there's also a paper in this conference that actually summarizes them and connects them to landscapes.
So, for instance, inside your MLPs, you have the symmetries, you can swap different attention heads, same as you can swap filters in a CNN, then normalization has the induces symmetries and attention and lowers, and so on and so forth. So you have a lot of different symmetries in your, in your model, and all of these transformations, they still leave the function, the actual function that the neural network computes is still the same.
Similarly, when you talk about the symmetry, you can actually look at it at different levels. So, I could look at, okay, are these two models, are these two sets of weights implementing exactly the same model?
Or I could take one step back and say I get the same loss for these two, and now the loss may have additional symmetries, maybe like a contrastive loss, I just look at inner products of my embeddings, or so, so there may be additional symmetries that are coming with the loss, but basically it's the same function, or it leaves the like these two sets of parameters always have exactly the same loss.
Why do we care about this? So fine, I have different parameterizations of the same model, I know this, so why do I care, and I may care because it affects several things that I may care about.
So, for instance, it affects what the loss landscape looks like for my neural network, and that obviously affects training and all sorts of things. So, it affects basically the configuration of my minima and how they're connected, and so on, and this has implications for optimization for sampling, because the minima essentially correspond to different modes there for merging models, and so on. So it has a lot of different ways I can be exploited, or at least how it affects what we are doing. So I would just want to point out, like, if you want to know more about this, there's a recent survey on these topics that I put up here.
So, this is one thing, is basically it affects how we are training the model, how we are merging the models, and so on.
The second part, where these symmetries come up, is if I want to just compare models, I want to learn about sort of a population of models, and this is also related to this emerging area of so-called weight-based learning.
So, in this case, I'm basically I treat the neural networks as data, and I'm looking at comparing and learning from neural networks and making predictions about neural networks themselves.
So, I'll go through these one by one, and I'll start up with a lost landscape one. Oh yeah, and importantly, so the role of the symmetries is that they can actually make our life easier, they can also make our life harder, so they can hinder like different things, make things harder, they can also lead to obfuscation, and so on, so okay, so let's look at loss landscapes first. So, what do they have to do with neural parameter symmetries? And the big picture is as follows: if I have a local optimum, then any transformation of this local optimum that's a neural parameter symmetry also has to be an optimum, because it's the same function, so if one performs well, the other tries to also perform well. So, with every transformation of my minimum, like my set of weights, that's a good model, I get another good model out, and so this obviously affects your loss landscape, because these are all your values in your loss landscape.
So, if you look at this for continuous symmetry, so continuous, meaning your symmetries essentially is like it's a continuous, it's an infinite group, like a rotation, invertible matrices, and so on.
What does this look like? Basically, now these transformations of my model, these orbits, it's basically a path, for instance, so I get these paths, like these valleys in my landscape, and what this means is that different minima are connected, some of them by some smooth path, because they lie on the same orbit, and this is something that also people have found empirically, is that if I train two models, there's often a smooth path between these models, it need not necessarily a straight line, but some kind of path, so these neural parameter symmetries give a partial explanation for why this may actually be the case, and so this helps me also in understanding maybe what this landscape looks like.
What does it look like if I don't have a continuous symmetry, but I have a discrete symmetry, like for instance permutations? So I take my set of weight matrices, I do some permutations of my rows and columns. That's not going to give me a continuous path, but I'm sort of jumping in my landscape, so for each of these permutations I'm going to get a basin, like basically some local optimum.
So, how does that affect my loss landscape? And one phenomenon that this can be connected to is the linear mode connectivity, so if I'm in one basin, I can basically, the function looks almost like convex. However, if I train two models independently, most likely I'm going to end up in two different basins. So, if I now take these two models and I would average them, maybe I want to do model merging, or so I just average their weights. Well, I'm going to basically, I'll have some bump in the middle, so if I go on a path from one model to the other, it's going to look like I have this bump, like you see in this picture here.
However, what I can do is I can sort of teleport my model into another basin, so what I can do is I can align my models, so I try to find a permutation that aligns these models, and now if I have aligned them correctly, they may lie in the same basin, and once they do, then I can actually find, like, and then if I interpolate between them linearly, well, like, this looks more flat because all of them in between are good models. So, one, then what that means is that if I want to merge models, I first have to align them. If I want to compare models, I probably first have to align them that they are more in correspondence to each other. How to exactly align them? That's a different story. That's not an easy problem. And there are several works that have found methods to actually do that.
So, in short, this actually affects your loss landscape, and it also affects how you do model merging, so you want to be careful with these symmetries to first sort of bring them in some sense in some kind of canonical position, and then you can average them.
This also has further implications for optimization, so for instance, if you look along that trajectory, well, the models are all good models, but the local loss landscape may still look different, so maybe in some cases the curvature is different, and so on, and in some cases the loss landscape may look better for optimization, and sometimes worse, and so what you could do is you could sort of go along your trajectory and basically find a good transformation of your model so that it works best for optimization, or if you're like bad, maybe worse for optimization, so you can try to do that, and there's several works on trying to like make this good for optimization.
The other option is well being aware of the symmetries, I could try to find optimization methods that are more invariant to symmetry, so the path SGD could be viewed as an example like that.
In general, I could also say that, well, maybe what I also want to do is, I want to somehow remove the symmetry and collapse everything to look more like just a few basins or something, so this would simplify my loss landscape. I don't have these many, many minima, and this could help, potentially, for optimization, where this could also help, for instances in sampling or variational inference, where all of these are different modes, and obviously going between modes or approximating a lot of modes is not that easy, so I want to simplify this and like make it look like more unimodal in some sense, or at least closer to that, and finally, like beyond just like looking at these local minima, the symmetries also lead to some conserved quantities during optimization. So, this helps in general. Also, if you want to do generalization theory and look at optimization dynamics, or so there are properties like this imbalance that are preserved that can be
derived from these symmetries.
All right.
The second part I wanted to mention
is what, so one is okay. We look at our models and we see the neural symmetries within the models, what effect effects they have on model merging, on optimization, and so on. The second reason why we care is because maybe we want to compare models. Well, merging is also kind of like comparing them, but maybe we want to actually learn on or look at large model collections.
And why do we want to do this? Maybe we want to analyze them, understand them, or maybe also edit them.
And in that case, if we want to do learning on these large model collections, we have neural networks that take other neural networks as inputs, so these are called meta networks or neural functionals, and so on.
What are the challenges? And this one challenge, of course, is that it's a very large scale problem, like the set of weights is pretty large, and that we have the symmetries in there, so we have to be careful with that.
What could this look like? So, let me give you a few examples.
One example of having a model population is when each neural network is essentially a data point. So, if you look at implicit neural representations, or nerves, or so, essentially each neural network is a data point. So, you could treat them as data points, and you could like to try to edit them, you could classify them, so you treat them basically as representations of your data points, or also generate new ones. So, for that, we have to now have neural networks that take other neural networks as inputs and work on those. The
other example of model populations is the models we have say on Hugging Face, so it's currently more than 2 million models. A lot of them are not very well documented, so maybe we want to actually learn something from these models. So, what you see here is the model Atlas, a graph of different models, which one is a fine tune of which, which one is a distillation of others, et cetera. So, you see these large clusters there, so maybe we can actually use like, so there's like a lot of large model collections available, so we could just treat them as input data and try to understand them.
Let me show you a few applications of this. So one is doing faster evaluation of the model. If we find like train new models or so, we have to evaluate them, and if your model is large and your data is large, this can be very expensive. If you had this magical small network that would just look at your large LLM and tell you this is going to work really well, or this not, that could be like save you a lot of time and compute. So this is kind of the aim, and indeed this can be much faster. So, as one example, if you look at meta networks on Loras for fine tunes, this can be up to 50 or 50,000 or 100,000 times faster than evaluating the actual underlying model that it predicts from.
So, faster evaluations. The other one is, well, if you look at this model atlas, for instance, we want to derive maybe more information about these models. What model was this model derived from? What data was it trained on, and so on and so forth.
What I have this application, which model would work well on my data? So, to do this, I have to make predictions on models as well, and this has implications, of course, maybe for IP and licensing. If I can do better bias estimation or model finding, if I know what the model was trained on which data, and so on.
Maybe I can also complete some of these model cards that have missing information, and so on. So I can like just understand my models better, understand patterns between the models.
Finally, I may also want to edit, suggest edits for the models, maybe for domain adaptation, for pruning or compression, and so on. I could do this with a neural network as well.
So, there's a lot of like potential applications of using neural net, treating neural networks as data,
and obviously, if I want to treat them as data, I want to compare models, maybe to see who's derived from whom. I can't just do a Euclidean distance between the matrices, because often they are not actually that well aligned.
So, what could we do?
Well, there's a few different works on deriving, like, well, I could design equivariant models on that take neural networks as input, so we could use some of the techniques we talked about in part one, for instance, the first example here is the deep weight space networks. They use linear equivariant layers, so the same colored matrices that we had in part one, you can basically derive here, and they are different matrices for interactions between weights, weights, and weights and biases, and so on.
If you want to go beyond linear layers, you could also use a transformer. So, a transformer is a permutation-invariant architecture. If you don't do masking and you don't do positional encodings, completely permutation invariant to equivariant to your sequence. So, what this work did is it said, well, it said, well, if I want to have these permutations of my weight matrices, these are also permutations, however, I only want to allow specific permutations, and not all possible permutations of all columns. So, what this does is, you know, that when you swap, like two nodes here in your computation graph, two neurons, it means you're basically swapping the corresponding rows and columns of the two matrices, so you couple these rows and columns of adjacent matrices. These are the different colors, and you just, and then you basically can swap those pairs. That's essentially the idea to encode exactly those symmetries that you see up on the top right in this in this graph, and then you can use attention as well. So this is a richer than linear, and the last idea here is to just treat the neural network as a graph and say the symmetry, so instead of the symmetries in your transformer that you like target to your application, you use the symmetries of a graph, so you encode the neural network as a graph, and the symmetries within the graph basically correspond to the symmetries within your neural network, and so you could do this with a computation graph, but that can be very large, so you can also build a so-called parameter graph, which works for different architectures. You see some examples here, and then you just use an off-the-shelf graph neural network, graph transform, or so, to process that.
So, finally, a few comments and questions on this for discussion. One thing is that, okay, I have these neural networks, and does equivariance - does it actually have any impact here? Does it help? So, obviously, for comparing models and model merging, I do want to do this alignment, but if I make predictions, does it actually help? So, let me show you one example. This is from Lora Networks, Meta network, so what this is doing is basically taking LORAS and trying to predict what this model performed well or not for some reasoning tasks. So now I have a few different variations. The first one are just generic networks and on the U and V matrices they don't care about symmetries.
The third one does the outer product, so it's agnostic to symmetries, but it's large. UV transpose is large. I don't necessarily want to use that.
And then I have one that uses a canonicalization for rotation and reflections, one that uses an invariant feature, eigen as a singular value, and then one that uses equivariant layers. These are nonlinear equivariant layers. So, okay, or linear with a specific nonlinearity.
Then, okay, so what you can see is you don't have to look at all the numbers that the ones that are symmetry aware that generally perform quite well in predicting the accuracy of these models.
If you look at the naive models, they do perform well in some cases, but their performance is not as robust. So, this is one case where equivariance seems to actually help in getting more robust performance.
Okay, and the same for data membership prediction. Yeah, so some other comments are okay, so one is like the big issue in this is obviously the scalability. Can I make this model scalable enough to be practically useful?
What are other questions in this area? So one is, well, which invariants should I use? If I use weights versus gradients, these are different invariances, and the last one is what do I actually use for my predictions, so I could build equivariant networks, I could also just use some invariant descriptors, like I could prepare them at the output level, or I could use these singular values, and so on, could also consider this as these are symmetry aware methods, and finally I could also use, say, this model atlas, or so, to compare like the models more at a graph level, so there's a lot of open directions and a lot of questions, how to actually do that.
Okay, so next we'll talk about some theory, and Gurus will take over,
so okay, so let's talk about theory.
This is my favorite part. So I'm going to start with some challenges from group averaging that we already discussed. The group averaging is, you know, discussing, but I'm going to talk about how to handle that using some ideas from, like, theory of expanders, and then I will talk about validation of symmetry testing, hypothesis testing for the presence presence of structure in data, and I will quickly talk about after that, I will quickly talk about generalization bounds, and I will, in the end, introduce some new directions for theoretical work, so let's start with the theory of expanders.
So groups, I mean, we all love groups, at least people who work in geometric machine learning should love groups, but the problem is groups are not good friends, they are like challenging to deal with. For instance, there is this permutation group. It's very large. It's a discrete set. You cannot, like, I don't know, you cannot compute derivatives over. It doesn't have any kind of meaning, and it's large, meaning that it's like already for 50 elements. It's bigger than, like, the size of it is bigger than the number of atoms in the earth, so it's challenging, and it makes the beautiful idea of group averaging less practical, because Who can, like, you know, average over, like, 50 factorial elements? Otherwise, group averaging is, as we discussed, like, continuous, like, it doesn't have any expressivity issues, it's just nice. So, the question we want to answer here is, is there some sort of small subsets of the group G that are still informative, that are still useful for, I don't know, group averaging or other kind of problems.
Surprisingly, this has been less developed in geometric machine learning, so to begin, I will just present the most natural idea of an informative subset of a group. It's just a generating set. You have some group, it's big, but you could probably find some small subset of it that, when you multiply elements, you will discover the whole group, and this is informative, quote unquote, why? Because basically, if you have, like, if you, if you have some function that satisfies invariance assumption on, or equivariance assumption on
generating set S, it will just extrapolate over the whole group. So, if the generic set is small, it's a good, so at least it's a sign that maybe we could find an informative subset. But the problem is finding a minimum size generating set is NP hard, unfortunately for like specific groups, it's possible to find such as, but in general, this is NP h
Not exactly optimal, but close to be optimal, and the idea is super simple.
It's just use randomness, so there is a theorem. I just wrote it in the language of, you know, generating set. Otherwise, it's just written for, like, sampling folks in 19th. They derive it in another language, but if you choose a random set of size, like, you know, 2.67 times log g, then with high probability it's a generating set, so that means you don't even need to solve that NPR problem, you just sample from the group, and within a constant factor, which we don't care, like two, three, these are just small constants. You're done. You have a generating set.
I'm not going to talk about the proof, but a lot of beautiful ideas from Fourier analysis and representation theory are applicable here. But now the problem, not the question here is, What are we going to do with these random subsets? What are the applications? There is this nice expander theory, 90s.
Now, how are we going to introduce it into geometric machine learning? That's what I'm going to talk about in the next part, which is applications of these random subset generations.
So, the first part is about computational complexity of learning with invariances, it has a like long story, but if I want to just summarize it, there is a problem of non-parametric regression in just double F spaces that if you want to solve, you have to do group averaging, which is nasty, but there exists a formulation of it, which basically tries to find some parameters, theta being, you know, invariant with respect to the group action, so theta is just the parameters of the non-linear, whatever, so left function, whatever it is, and we want to find, we want to, like, just, you know, the feasibility set of this optimization is nasty, but if you have a generating set, as I discussed, you can reformulate this problem for free with just randomly sampling, you know, the conditions, and that means you could solve finding, like, learning linear learning between variances in just logarithmically sized with subset, which is, which has been some open problem, apparently, but you could simply solve it. I'm not going to talk about what L function, and you know, eta, this formulation is, but trust me, there is like the learning problem reduces to this convex optimization, and all you need is to just sample a set, and then you're done. You just solve this problem.
Next, this is super useful for data augmentation.
So, as we discussed in the first part, data augmentation needs, if you want to fully augment your data set, you need to fully add all sorts of transformations, like again, like 50 factorial number of atoms in the earth, so it's productivity. We cannot do that.
Another question is, can we find subsets of groups that, at least, I just use those subsets, and I'm still good, still can at least achieve a statistical gains, statistical benefits have some sort of same saving in sample complexity, and the answer is yes. Using the theory of expanders, just log g random group elements suffice for achieving full statistical benefits of data augmentation. So, again, like instead of d factorial, you just augment your data set with d log d random elements, and you're done. You are in this regime that you cannot have any sort of other improvement, which is huge, like exponential improvement over the baseline.
The last application, which is the most interesting one, is to approximate group averaging, as I promised you in the first slide. So, replace group averaging with just some set, some random set, instead of averaging over group, average over some random set.
So, what is the quality of this approximation?
It turns out that we prove that you know the approximation error, or the power, the, you know, the l2 distance, or approximation error of such, such thing is bounded by something that is small if the size of S is log G.
So, in other words, you can, like, remember, group averaging were large, but it had a lot of good properties here, if you choose a random set S, then you can approximate group averaging, and you know group averaging is back into the game, you can just use it again.
So this is the core idea.
You could observe this in, like, at least in this toy experiment, I just consider absolute value, sine, invariance, and you know this red dot shows that after, like, 32 random elements from a group of size, you know, 10 to the power of six, the test loss, the, you know, the kind of improvement in test loss is just saturated, which is essentially the log of group size, somehow the, you know, within constant factors, and this is appeared uniformly over epochs. I'm not sampling s at each epoch, I'm just sampling s once and use it for all epochs, all function classes.
So this is huge. It's just uniform over all functions and just with logs size, so anyway, I'm just going to conclude this part by telling you that, unfortunately, even though this theory is super nice, it has some problems, some issues, and the issue is that if you want to have, instead of approximation, instead of bounding the error, you want exactness, meaning that the group averaging is exactly the sum over the subset s.
You can use Fourier analysis to prove that it's not possible unless s is the whole group. So, if you want exact symmetry, enforcing exact symmetry, that is hard. Just, you have to do group averaging. There is no other simple solution. If you want to just approximate it with some, just some error, it's easy, just logarithmic in the size of group, that's enough. And if you want a full statistical gain, either in this case or in data augmentation, again, logarithmic size is enough.
So this is this part I hope you enjoy it, and these are great mathematical tools. I realize that these are not - these have not been used a lot in geometric machinery. So I believe that there is a lot of opportunities to use these expander ideas and these things for either a study of neural networks or optimization under symmetries.
Okay, let's quickly talk about other results very quickly.
And next part I talk about testing symmetry. As you can see here, I have like two data sets. One of them has like a rotationally invariant distribution is coming from sampling from the rotationally variant one, the other one is coming from some non-invariant distribution, and the goal is to distinguish these two regimes, is to just do hypothesis testing and understand whether data is invariant or not.
So, why is this important? Okay, this is a classical problem in statistics, but for geometric machine learning, it has a lot of importance, because you want to build models, and you want to assume such sort of symmetries.
So, first you need to verify that such symmetry is, you know, indeed exists in your data. Otherwise, you are just, you know, having a wrong model. You have, like, biased, and a lot of, like, interpretivity problems. So, this is some sort of pre-processing before any kind of geometric machine learning.
Okay, so if you want to use mathematical notation, the data distribution is invariant. If you basically rotate it with apply some group elements, and it's still the same distribution. Here we have, like, distribution of, you know, rotationally invariant distribution - it's non-invariant if you know, if you think of it, a distribution is not invariant if there exists some kind of group element that, in some, I don't know, in some distance that is your favorite distance, mu and its translation version are different with each other. This is the, you know, the alternative hypothesis that your data is not invariant, and the 1g that violates this symmetry is also important for us, because it gives us some sort of hint that which kind of direction maximizes, or which kind of differential directions causes this asymmetry. So, the 1g is important, for instance, in this example, non-invariance, you know, pi half is the G that maximizes or takes this supremum, so it's just, you know, with pi half rotations, you will realize that these two distributions are completely different, right?
So here is the result, it's interesting, I mean, it's so first, it's intuitively, let's just agree, let's just agree that this problem, like, is NP hard, because you have a group, if you choose arbitrary, like some sort of fine, I don't know, permutation groups, and some nice metrics, some distances, finding this arc soup, like finding the good group element is MP hard, it makes sense because you are having a function optimized over permutation, which is like, you know, a lot of graph problems are just of this kind, but
so how do we even, like, you know, this this optimization is NP-hard, so how do we get, how do we get some solution from that? The idea is, again, we just have one idea: use randomness.
Just you cannot find soup, just select G randomly and hope that it works.
And it turns out that it indeed works. So we had this theorem that we proved that this soup
is, you know, within constant using factor of two of the expectation over a random g, so in other words, you can randomly sample and then test, and that's enough. If you, if you don't care about, like, replacing epsilon with two epsilon, or I don't know, epsilon divided by half, if you are fine with constant factors of epsilon, which we are always fine, because it's not changing the order of magnitude. Then you're fine. Then it's just, you know, randomized tests work very well, which is counterintuitive, because you know you're having it. If you think of it as deterministically, if you forget about the random selection of group elements deterministically, this, you know, sup could be approximated with just a max over a grid, grid over the group, but that grid is always really large, like, you know, you are just having a grid over a group, which the group always has, I don't know, sometimes has like d parameters, d squared from so it's huge, it's exponentially large, but the good news is using the properties of these distances and these invariances, because this is a group, this is not an arbitrary space, you could reduce a lot of these conditions, and indeed you could prove that only with just linear size or quadratic size in the, you know, the number of parameters that your group has, you could, you know, find a good cover in the so-called cover, which means that they said that you're getting maximized, which means, like, you could deterministically also hope that there is something interesting happening here, but randomness is just best, it just gives you constant factor of two, anyway.
It's still open to use these methods, these like constant factors or coverings for optimization over groups. It's widely open, and we don't know how to integrate testing and symmetry ever architecture design. This is more applied question. We don't know how to integrate these like testing symmetries, update like finding the G that violates symmetry, and just integrate it into the learning architecture.
So this was the second part.
Next, I talk about sample complexity benefits very briefly.
Okay, so we had, we already showed like a lot of interesting cases that symmetries help.
We had like, you know, this neque and like molecular atomistic data sets that they all like show a lot of import, a lot of like gain when you have when you encode symmetries. So we want to here understand what is the theory behind that, in theory, what we could say about, like, gains in symmetry, and we are interested to be more general, as general as possible. We don't want to be specific to specific models, so the result that we have here, under some classical assumptions that I'm not going to go into detail, is the generalization bound in the gray box could be bounded by some quantities that depend on group and your input space. So let's just parse it. Let's, let's talk about it. There is two terms that are affected by the symmetries, the green term, that is the exponent, and it's just the dimension of your input space minus the dimension of group, so you have a reduced space, and maybe the dimension, the number of free parameters are also changed, so that is one aspect of improvement. The other aspect is you have the, you know, the volume of MLG, which is some volume of the quotient space, but essentially this means you are having a reduced input space, when you take care of symmetries, when you remove real analysis, for instance, if you have discrete groups, if you have finite groups, it's just the volume of your input space divided by the group size, which makes sense.
We also prove that this is the end, so you, there is no three, there is no third factor that affects sample complexity gain. It's the dimension volume that's like,
so how do we prove that? This, by the way, I didn't assume anything about the group or the input space, it's just fully general.
So the way we prove that is basically by looking at, at least, like intuitively, you could look at the Fourier series representations of functions and see how much of saving I get. So, here is a toy example: you have unit circle encoded by, like, the angle zero to two pi, and you have Fourier series, which is a bunch of sine and cosine functions, and it turns out, interestingly, that if you consider just reflection about y axis, then you basically have to just consider half of the almost half of the eigenfunction, so the rest of you like this sine sinusoidal functions with like 2k or cosine with 2k plus one, they just disappear. You cannot have any kind of such functions in your Fourier representation, because they will break this symmetry.
So you get a lot of saving, like your the number of parameters is just divided by half, which is not random. You could extend this theory to, which is so-called extended Weiss law, to any, it's a bit technical, any compact connected manifold, any continuous group, but basically anything. It's really difficult to violate these assumptions, and the number of, you know, eigenvalues of Laplace-Lithurami operator is basically the number of sine and cosine functions that remain after symmetry, so this is just a complicated way to talk about that. For arbitrary functions,
the takeaway is that Weyl's law and extended Weyl's law allows us to obtain the characterize that sparsity, and that will lead to the proof of sample complexity gain, but that is not the end of the story. You could also extend it to optimal transport and other problems of like estimating under invariances. So this is pretty general, and there is probably I would believe that there is a still room for applying these Weil's law to other problems in a study of efficiency of invariances.
Okay, now I want to talk about some new directions in geometric machine learning, more of a like from theoretical side.
So, let's talk about any dimensional models.
So, the idea of any dimensional model is we have a fixed set of parameters, maybe a small set of parameters, and we want to have a machine learning model that works and could be evaluated on objects of varying sizes. For instance, consider these graph neural networks, like the training set, the left-hand side is just probably a small graph, but because graph neural networks could be just evaluated on like probably larger graphs, you could test it over larger graphs, which is the right hand side data set, and indeed it's it's working pretty well, which means that you have a fixed set of parameters you train over a small set and you test over a large set, and you know this is called an any dimensional model here for graph neural networks, but you could apply it for anything, but before that, let me just theoretically quickly talk about how is this ever possible, because like having a fixed set of parameters is just, you know, it's a lot of restrictions, how could you find like relevant architectures on bigger and bigger data, so here is a toy example.
Consider linear functions of, like, d letters, d variables. It's just, you know, the sum of, you know, there is not much room for saving parameters. It's just some of the, you know, the linear function applied on x1 to x d, so it has d parameters, and now focus on permutation invariant linear functions, which is somehow close, closely related to the invariant theory part that I presented in the first part, if you remember, and if you focus on permutation invariant linear function, it turns out that there is just one function that satisfies permutation variance, and it's just, you know, all those weights are equal to each other, so there is just one weight, one parameter, and what does this mean? It means, at least in this toy example, you have one parameter, you can just use a low dimensional training data, and then generalize and evaluate model on whatever kind of high dimensional data that you have, and it just works, like you know, no matter how large d is, it's just one parameter, you can learn it easily, and you can extend it to a very, to a lot of groups, and going beyond linear functions, there is this theory called representation and stability in mathematics that is developed like around 10 years ago that is basically telling us that this is not specific to this, for
example, of linear functions being in permutation variant, it applies to other cases, for instance, like for quadratic functions, you have just two variables, for arbitrary k polynomials in permutation variance, you get something again. I just computed it here, independent of dimension, and you could apply it to other groups and other polynomial spaces, or linear covariance spaces. It's general, and it's called representation stability.
So, yeah, people use this before, like ever the term representation stability enters machine learning community. People used it back in graph invariant networks, but a more like a more systematic treatment exist recently, last year in the researcher, and people studied like obtaining features like learning theory or like I don't know having any dimensional models for learning PDEs or like optimization over like across dimension because many many properties like graph properties or many other like things could be defined over a scale, like you know, the clique number of a graph is just defined for, like, it's well defined for graphs across, like, for any graph or any graph on any number of nodes, right. So you have some sort of, and you could also apply to information theory if you are interested. The capacity of channels, which is an important thing in information theory, is just a symmetric optimization, and it turns out that this paper is just, I guess, out like two months ago, that you could use representation stability information theory, and it helps a lot.
So, what are the research questions here? First, identify any dimensional behavior. There is a lot of applications, and we should first ask whether there is any dimensional behavior that we expect.
Second, how to parameterize it. This is very important, because the parameters are the things that they're going to transfer over scale. So, if I use a wrong parameterization, it's not going to transfer over a scale.
And the third question, which I want to emphasize, is evaluating model. This is non-trivial for, like, fixed-size models. It's just, you know, trivial. You just have trained a model, you just, you know, evaluate it. It's just trivial. You can do it, but here you want to evaluate model on a bigger input, and how you could just feed that bigger input into this model. This is non-trivial. You need to make sure that your model is ever defined that could be evaluated over scale.
This is still a matter of study. I believe that there is a lot of questions here, and I just, you know, I just hope that you like the idea, and there's a lot of open things here from theory side and also from applications.
Okay, last slides we devoted this tutorial to symmetries, but the thing is, geometric machine learning is beyond symmetries. There is also, you know, the fourth geometry is more general. You could think of it as like a lot of using a lot of other geometric specs in data and model and weight, like, and parameters to have more efficient models. So I'm going to briefly talk about some other methods for utilizing geometry, or studying geometry more of a from theory perspective.
So this is the first result, which I found interesting for you.
We have this manifold hypothesis. This is also part of geometric machine learning, that if your data, okay, if you, if you want to work with high dimensional data, you quickly get to the curse of dimensionality, but the manifold hypothesis is just a way to try to handle this, and the hypothesis is that the data lies on a low dimensional manifold, so you just need to take care of that lower dimension, which is the intrinsic dimension is just smaller, so maybe that's that's the way that you could bypass curse of dimensionality,
and this paper is telling us that it's not true, so like having just manifold hypothesis is not enough for us to make sure that we have learnability, so for instance, there is this - I'm not going to talk about the detail, but there is this skew lower bounds for that prove that ReLU neural networks are difficult to impact learnability.
The thing is, under manifold hypothesis, this is doable if you have a lower bound on the curvature of your manifold, which means like something like in the green, you know, green manifold that I have here, something that is positively curved, similar to sphere. If that's the case, then okay, yes, manifold hypothesis helps a lot, but if it's not, then you may have like some sort of space filling manifolds, or some even if you have bounded curvature, but you don't know that you have a positive lower bound, for instance, you have hyperbolic input spaces, you are in trouble.
So I just want to clarify that manifold hypothesis is nice, but there is still open problems. We still need to understand in what settings manifold hypothesis is really helpful, because otherwise there is these problems that space filling curves, and that you know they don't allow learnability.
Finally, topological deep learning, so the idea of topological deep learning is to just work and process topological structuring data using deep learning, so we have like a lot of topologically meaningful things, like the number of connected components in your, I don't know, in your shape or the number of loops in your molecule, these are having like meanings in probably in chemistry or physics or orientability or planar planarity of your molecule, your drug. These are important in practice, and these are topological measures. And the goal of topological deep learning is to predict them from data and make like deep learning models that work well for these things.
The takeaway is that, okay, you may say that these topological deep learning, these topological spaces could be modeled with, as you can see here, with graphs, so I can just use graph neural networks, and I'm done. Why should I care about topological deep learning? I just have graph neural networks, message passing. The thing is, a recent paper shows that this is not going to work, so if you just merely work with,
you know, if you just work with message passing, then it's not going to be able to predict, like, diameter, the number of connected components, the number of, I don't know, loops, the number of holes, whatever, it's just unable, so basically, message passing has just like no meaning for topological deep learning, and you need other things. There is just this, you know, a scaled MCN that I'm not going to talk about, but this is one way to achieve some, you know, expressive struct expressive method for topological deep learning. This goes beyond this tutorial, but I just want to say that this scale MCN is also still not - I mean, there is a still room for improvement, so this is not the end of the story. There is still ways to improve that. It's just the first architecture that is just, you know, one of the architectures that you could end up with being expressive, but it's not the end of story.
Okay, we are done with the theory part.
And to conclude this tutorial, I'm just going to talk about what are we going to do with symmetries in modern applications. Could we, should we take care of symmetries or should we forget about it, as like there is large language models, foundation models, sometimes they don't care about symmetries, and they work pretty well.
So, what are we going to do with geometric machine learning? What is the future of geometric machine learning? So, there is a view, I mean, obviously this is a very hard question to answer, and it's just, who knows, like I cannot predict the future, but the thing is, there is some. So, first of all, we all agree that if you have, like, a small data sets, or if you, if you, if the data is expensive, for instance, in weight space learning, having symmetries encoded helps you a lot. This is definitely working, like for small scale and for expensive data at a scale, at like scale of like, I don't know, language models or large scale. There is this debate, but there has been this recent paper about whether a covariance helps at scale or not, and as you can see in this, like plot, there is still a gap, there is still improvements that you could get from equivariances encoded into model. So I would say that it's not the end of a story. We should just first identify the application and make sure that symmetries are relevant to that, and in my opinion, there is many cases that data is expensive, or you know, there is room for application, so there is.. it's not the end of geometric machine learning.
And last, lastly, I just want to say a bit.. I just want to talk a bit about, like, what kind of symmetries we hope to hope to, you know, deal with with modern machine learning. So the thing is, if you have approximate symmetries, it's probably still useful and still still makes sense to enco
The geometry is more general. You could think of it as like a lot of using a lot of other geometric specs in data and model and weights like and parameters to have more efficient models. So I'm going to briefly talk about some other methods for utilizing geometry or studying geometry more of a from theory perspective, so this is the first result, which I found interesting for you.
We have this manifold hypothesis. This is also part of geometric machine learning, that if your data, okay, if you, if you want to work with high dimensional data, you quickly get to the curse of dimensionality, but the manifold hypothesis is just a way to try to handle this, and the hypothesis is that the data lies on a low dimensional manifold, so you just need to take care of that lower dimension, which is the intrinsic dimension, is just smaller, so maybe that's that's the way that you could bypass curse of dimensionality,
and this paper is telling us that it's not true, so like having just manifold hypothesis is not enough for us to make sure that we have learnability, so for instance, there is this - I'm not going to talk about the detail, but there is this skew lower bounds for that prove that ReLU neural networks are difficult to impact learnability.
The thing is, under manifold hypothesis, this is doable if you have a lower bound on the curvature of your manifold, which means like something like in the green, you know, green manifold that I have here, something that is positively curved, similar to sphere. If that's the case, then okay, yes, manifold hypothesis helps a lot, but if it's not, then you may have, like, some sort of a space, a space filling manifold, or some, even if you have bounded curvature, but you don't know that you have a positive lower bound, for instance, you have hyperbolic input spaces, you are in trouble.
So I just want to clarify that manifold hypothesis is nice, but there is still open problems. We still need to understand in what settings manifold hypothesis is really helpful, because otherwise there is this problem that space filling curves, and that you know they don't allow learnability.
Finally, topological deep learning, so the idea of topological deep learning is to just work and process topological structure in data using deep learning, so we have like a lot of topologically meaningful things, like the number of connected components in your, I don't know, in your shape or the number of loops in your molecule, these are having like, you know, meanings in, like, probably in chemistry or physics, or orientability, or planar planarity of your molecule, your drug. These are important in practice, and these are topological measures. And the goal of topological deep learning is to predict them from data and make like deep learning models that work well for these things.
The takeaway is that, okay, you may say that these topological deep learning, these topological spaces could be modeled with, as you can see here, with graphs, so I can just use graph neural networks, and I'm done. Why should I care about topological deep learning? I just have graph neural networks, message passing. The thing is, a recent paper shows that this is not going to work, so if you just merely work with,
you know, if you just work with message passing, then it's not going to be able to predict, like, diameter, the number of connected components, the number of, I don't know, loops, the number of holes, whatever, it's just unable, so basically message passing has just, like, no meaning for topological deep learning, and you need other things. There is just this, you know, a scaled MCN that I'm not going to talk about, but this is one way to achieve some, you know, expressive stroke expressive method for topological deep learning. This goes beyond this tutorial, but I just want to say that these scaled MCN is also still not, I mean, there is still room for improvement. So this is not the end of the story. There is still ways to improve that. It's just the first architecture that is just, you know, one of the architectures that you could end up with being expressive, but it's not the end of story.
Okay, we are done with the theory part, and to conclude this tutorial, I'm just going to talk about what are we going to do with symmetries in modern applications. Could we, should we take care of symmetries, or should we forget about it, as like there is large language models, foundation models. Sometimes they don't care about symmetries, and they work pretty well.
So, what are we going to do with geometric machine learning? What is the future of geometric machine learning? So, there is a view, I mean, obviously this is a very hard question to answer, and it's just, who knows, like I cannot predict the future, but the thing is, there is some. So, first of all, we all agree that if you have, like, a small data sets, or if you, if you, if the data is expensive, for instance, in weight space learning, having symmetries and coded helps you a lot. This is definitely working, like, for small scale and for expensive data at a scale, at like a scale of like, I don't know, language models or large scale, there is this debate, but there has been this recent paper about whether a covariance helps at scale or not, and as you can see in this like plot, there is still a gap. There is still improvements that you could get from equivariances encoded into model. So, I would say that it's not the end of a story. We should just first identify the application and make sure that symmetries are relevant to that. And, in my opinion, there is many cases that data is expensive, or you know, there is room for application, so there is.. it's not the end of geometric machine learning.
And last, lastly, I just want to say a bit.. I just want to talk a bit about, like, what kind of symmetries we hope to, you know, deal with modern machine learning, so the thing is, if you have approximate symmetries, it's probably still useful, and it still makes sense to encode them using geometric machine learning, because, as I discussed, like, there is, there was one theoretical work that I said, like approximate symmetry, is not that difficult. You could achieve it like with exponential gap, so there is room. There is room for improvement if you just forget about symmetries, exact symmetries, and there is actually motivation for doing that, because sometimes exactly symmetric models are not much robust, they are just sometimes you need some, you need some space to make sure that you could just, I don't know, in optimization or in your training data set, you don't have full symmetries. This can happen, for instance, in images or whatever, and sometimes an interesting thing happens, you have a data set, and it's already canonicalized.
So, if your data set is already canonicalized, then you don't need symmetries, right? You have already canonicalized datasets. For instance, here in this QM nine data set, we just observed that, like, a good fraction of data points are just canonicalized, although they are already canonicalized in the data set. So then you should not expect symmetric machine learning to improve, right? Because I mean, what are we going to do? It's already canonical, it's already done. So it's important to first check if your data needs symmetry, that evaluation that I talked about, like testing or whatever, this is non-trivial. I just want to emphasize that you need to first evaluate data set, and after that, there is a lot of interesting things that still happen in geometric machine learning, and yeah, I guess I talked about that, like we need to develop models that are more flexible and being adaptive symmetries, given the lots of applications, from like foundation models to just, you know, protein design, and yeah, symmetries can be restrictive. I just talked about that, and that is the end of tutorial. So the material is just finished. I just have a few sentences to acknowledge people who help us to prepare this tutorial. So first of all, I acknowledge funding from, like, NSF AI Institute, TLUS, Ivo, and Alexander von Humboldt Foundation, also MIT Harvard, which I'm affiliated, and MIT and TM, which Stephanie is affiliated.
We acknowledge support from them. I acknowledge great discussion I had with a lot of wonderful people in our geometric machine learning community.
This is, by the way, this is not, you know, this is not canonicalized. It's just randomly permuted, so it's just, you know, yeah, there is no order in this. Yeah, and I greatly appreciate discussion with all amazing folks, and you know, this is a good community. So, if you are interested to work in some, you know, having wonderful colleagues. This is the community to come and work anyway. I just thank Jegalkar Research Group, my advisors group at MIT and UM, it's an international lab, and Deborah's group at Harvard. Thank you so much for your attention. My email is just right here. It's simple to remember, BZT at MIT.
And I'm going to be available during the conference if you want to discuss. If you have any comments, just want to discuss, feel free to shoot me an email. I'm going to be also available for, like, on market, so if you have any, also if you have any discussion related to that, I'm also super happy to be involved. So, thank you so much.
And now we also have time for a few questions. If anyone has questions, they can do a Q and A as well.
I had a quick question about one of the last slides you showed, you were talking about canonicalized data sets, you know, canonicalized data sets. Okay, yeah. In QM nine, you observed. Yeah, can you expand a little bit more about this? Because I guess what really matters in the end, if what's going to happen on the test set, right? But maybe you don't have guarantees on what you're going to find in a test set, maybe the date on which you train, on which you benchmark. Here, they're all kind of canonicalized, but, like, yeah. Do you have any insight? Because this is very interesting. I think this is a very interesting observation in general, and it's one of those kind of perspectives that are important to advance the field. So, I was curious to know if you had more specific, you know, intuitions about generalizing to test sets where maybe you don't have, you know, strong guarantees, so yeah, that is an open question. Yes, this is interesting. So, if you, you need to take care of train and test set both together, otherwise, like, you know, but the thing is, if you have canonicalized data, and if you somehow learn that canonicalization from data set, then you could probably apply to a training set that is also not canonicalized, but I would say that this is largely an open area of research to just evaluate not test set but also training set and make sure that both are canonicalized. That is my understanding. I think the other thing to notice is, like, when you test, like, you check whether, like, the general model versus the invariant model, which one is better. It's good to see, like, on the specific data that it said that you're testing, does it actually matter, right? Because, like, maybe you have, you are thinking about generic molecules, but maybe like most of them are already aligned, so you never actually see the other transformations, and of course, if you never see the transformations, like any, like you don't need the symmetry to predict, however, then it's the question, okay, if your later application data sets are going to look like that, it's okay, if not, then you may still have to think about it, so it's a little bit thinking about on which data sets are we evaluating our models, on which data sets are we comparing them, is symmetry needed or not, and then which am I later going to apply them, like actually deploy them as well. So I think it's a little bit also thinking about the data set and the evaluation techniques, like when we make these judgments to see, like, okay, what actually plays a role.
Thank you very much.
Hi, very nice talk. So, I have a question on the test of the equivariance side.
So, I understand. So, you have a result that we can do random sampling from the group and use the largest gap there, which is two approximation of the of the gap. I was wondering whether this result can be transformed into the, for example, the test error.
So, basically, the probability result, like not just the approximation result. Yeah, that's a good question. Yes, we have, we do have probabilistic version of this, which is, you know, you cannot derive that from this, and you cannot derive this from that. So, we have an independent result on the probability of this being deviated by the factor of two of its epsilon, and so we already have this in the paper. Unfortunately, I didn't have time to cover that, but yes, we do have this. I see. So, it's more like a large derivation bound, kind of, yes, large deviation. Also, we have. Yes, I see. I see. Okay. Thanks. Another question is related to the sample, the data augmentation part.
If I understand correctly, the basically the main result there is the number of the samples, the sample complexity we need is a log of the size of the group, right?
Something like that. I was, I'm curious about, like, the constant. So, basically, indeed, I think this result is very, very beautiful. So, I would like to use that in a practice, basically train a transformer, or like a basically the neural network itself is agnostic to the symmetry I have, but I would like to do data augmentation. I would like to know in practice, indeed, how much, how many like a data, like augmentation I need to conduct. That's a great question. Yes, so unfortunately this constant here is not 2.6 that I derived, it's just something bigger, and indeed, if you need, you know, a lot like the accuracy is small, then this constant blows up. However, if you apply this data augmentation to the problems, like which have some sort of finite fixed parameter things, any dimensional models. If you remember from the next part, then the constant could be bounded. So I should say that here there is still room to improve that constant and make it more practical.
And the constant here is different from the approximate group of, so approximate group averaging is nice. It's a 2.67 This this constant is not nice, because basically you are sampling from group, you are introducing some sort of variance into model, and if you, you know, if your desired accuracy is super small, then this method has just some problems that it's just hidden in the concept, but I would say it's largely open to make it further improved. I see. So, I was even wondering whether we can, for example, directly use a multi-layer perception or MLP to the graph data, but just to do data augmentation for the permutation. Yeah, so, so have you got a chance to do some tests like this? I'm just curious. Yeah, that will be an interesting direction. I didn't try it, I just tried it for approximate group averaging, because it has like this nice constant, yeah, and it's at least in two experiments it was working, but for this I didn't try it. It's an interesting problem, I see. Thank you so much.
Hi, yeah, thanks for the wonderful talk. And I have a question about sample complexity part of the like generalization bound, which, if it's too technical, we can discuss later on.
So, basically, I have two questions. First, is like, seems like the minimax bound is basically just like ignoring the constant, I think the rate itself is just basically just extension of the minimax bound on kind of general classical information theory, in the sense that the dimension is just dimension dimension constant is just substituted to the quotient space dimension.
Am I understanding? Yeah, that's correct. Yeah, so like there's no kind of additional advantage beyond just dimension reduction in a sense of rates. Oh, yeah, that's a great question. So, the thing is, I a bit like oversimplified the result.
Yes, intuitively it is really nice and aligning with whatever we know, but the main major problem that happens here is that M modular group is not always a manifold, it not, it doesn't always have a meaningful kind of volume. You need to take care of differential geometry to even define this volume, and if manifold is compact, it's, it has a beautiful theory. If it's not compact, then I don't know, it's super difficult, and the second question is whether the setting is noiseless or noisy, noisy. Then I think the like typically in manifold regression, like the alignment of noise is also important, whether you're in the same, whether the noise arrives in the same manifold, or noise can be perturbed from the manifold. How does that happen here? Like, oh, is your setting? No. So here we have noise in the label, so for manifold, like x are just coming from manifold noise free, you know that the input is just noise free from the label. Sorry, sorry, yeah, you're right, you're right. And the last question is like people usually can derive the approximation. I mean it's a little kind of complicated for deep neural network, for but if you're in a two layer neural network, you can typically the technique is similar that you derive the kind of bounds with respect to the width of the neural network by in terms of approximation is similar result can be extended for this kind of group structure.
I would say for neural networks you have a, you have a problem that the I don't know how to align those eigenvalues of Laplacian into neural networks. If there is an alignment, then yes, you could use this theorem for neural networks as well, but I would assume that those kind of alignments are also difficult because we don't have much theory and much understanding in differential geometry about the eigenvalue eigen functions of Laplacian.
Cool. Thank you very much.
Hello, the question I have is kind of high level, so for example, if we have the permutation group, and we want the neural network to be invariant under the entire permutation group, then something like deep sets, which has the symmetry structure ingrained in it, is preferable, but if we have it to, if we want it to be invariant under a very small sub group of the permutation group, say sine flip, then I guess taking a group average is more beneficial, so is there any generalized recipe on how the size of the invariant group depends, the choice of our architecture, whether to incline it or to take a group average? That's a really good question. I think this is really tied to representation theory, we need to, as far as I know, we need to take care of each group separately. There is no general recipe, I mean, group averaging, or like approximate group averaging, they work always, but for just having something similar to deep sets, you know, as far as I know, it's it's a bit difficult to, it's a deep representation theory problem, and I still personally don't have any kind of clear answer to that. Thank you.
So, thanks for the really great tutorial.
So, it strikes me that I'm interested in how this maybe can be generalized to other forms of inference, so in some sense, if I have a question to this network, you can tell me, is there some sequence of group operations that the question might be, you know, for some some input x is, if you'd seen a training data point x prime such that you know g1 of g2 of g3 of x prime equals x, then you can answer that question, you know, yes or no. So, I don't know what would be teams that belong in the major league or something like that, and there's some group operation over them, so for some kinds of it's almost like you're getting inference for free, like if you cannot, if you have a canonical user and then a classifier, then you can, you can take anything, canonicalize it, and then run it through your classifier, and you know, is it true or false?
So I'm wondering if various logical, there may be their collections of logical inference rules operating on sets of assertions that might also be viewed as being a group operation. Do you have any ideas about that?
Yeah, for inference, I guess. I,
yeah, I have this idea that, as you said, like if the data is canonicalized, if you know the canonicalized map, that's probably something that you could do, but going beyond that, I personally don't have any kind of, yeah, I haven't seen any kind of, because I mean, you can sort of imagine there's, if you have a set of axioms, and then you have the rules of logic, you can drive all of their consequences, now you can presumably derive other equivalent sets of axioms from which you could drive everything, so, so there's a sense in which there must be some generating elements, but a little bit like transitivity, mean, right? Yeah,
well, think about it as some graph, and like, whatever edges or something, it creates a certain structure, like there may be, like, I don't have anything off the top of my head, but yeah, and then you can think of, okay, if it has a certain structure, it would - these other edges are essentially induced, or something like that, right? I went to the reasoning tutorial this morning, so that's why I'm sort of with the generator of the group, right? Any, yeah, exactly, it's probably possible, I haven't thought about it too much, so it's finding the correct correspondences, I think.
Thanks very much.
You had a slide about representation stability earlier. Can you elaborate a little bit more on how representation stability comes in? Oh, representation stability. Yes,
so the idea of representation stability
is.. oh, sorry,
any dimensional models. Yeah, so the idea of representation stability is if you have equivariant linear maps and you both increase the dimension of covariant linear maps. You could think of it as big matrices. If you increase the dimension of that matrix, and simultaneously you enlarge the group, for instance, you have permutation groups of d letters, so as d enlarges, groups enlarge, right, and the covariant maps between permutation, like representations, will also enlarge. So, representation stability tells you that in the limit you get just finitely many number of parameters to parameterize that matrix. You don't, nothing is going to scale with D.
You see, what I'm saying, for instance, in this linear maps, you have linear maps, they are growing, here is invariance, but you could also think of it as equivariance, they are growing, the group is permutation invariance on D letters, so it's also growing, but when both spaces grow, the number of parameters you need to specify, then is going to saturate some somewhere. It's this is called representation stability. So, having fixed parameters for evaluating and specifying equivariant layers at the scale, is there an interpretation of this in terms of like SN representations or like a more mathematical, I guess this is this is really involved, so I don't have any clear intuition why we have this representation stability. This is just a super algebraic, like, yeah, yeah. Thank you.
Hi, you mentioned at the

